Hola again Eva,

I hope you’re - though busy - well. 
Very good you can see the situations benefits, besides all the busy and crazyness. 
(It took a while for me to, admittedly, get that far … or at least I’m not rediscovering all this, as some of my contracts see a bit of a fin(n)ishing… ). 


Thanks for the kind notes and reflections about Helen. 
It’s a bit of a special and complicated situation, and your note some years ago, about some things being quite difficult to resolve over electronic communications, has revisited my attention in increasing lucidity, repeatedly, lately 

The case with Helen brings up some points that are a bit… well, intriguing ( < alas, the background is sad, so the words don’t quite fit it… but… ) in both what can happen to people in bad contexts, and what it does to people around them. 

Somewhere I’d like to think I have learned a bit, though years and a number of friends with similar backgrounds to Helen ( though to varying extents of unfortunateness ), what people sounds like when they’re not stressed, and when they’re under the influence of their contexts. (Maybe it’s an illusion, this sense I think I’ve developed… but but… ).

I can sort of hear what’s happened to Helen, by how she acts. 
She’s of course grown up with a mother that’s ended up in unfortunate situations in life, with the father leaving at an early age, and the mother having some unprocessed anger, that’s befallen Helen and her slightly younger brother. They’ve grown up in public housing, in a poorer part of town, in a city about 40 km from London. Besides the mother’s unprocessed frustrations, poverty and the English class society making peoples class in society felt, hasn’t helped Helen develop in too much of a relaxed way. 
Somewhere she still somehow managed to study that BA at the same programme as me - graphic information design - at the University of Westminster… even though there were tuition fees, which she paid off. 

Anyway, after some initial pleasant notes that comes across from Helen, starting off after her communications about her Graduate Show, she started writing increasingly more, also about her emotional matters. 
She’s probably been through quite a number of unfortunate experiences, not quite sure knowing how to channel her emotions or read how people absorb things - these filters, i suspect, can get destroyed when someone’s exposed to a lot of anger by someone like a parent with more anger than understanding. In any event, that’s what I think might be able to explain why she got quite - increasingly - angry with me, when I couldn’t keep up with her communications, whether to acknowledge or answer them in full. She told me she thought  I was trying to distance myself from me, and wanted reassurances I wasn’t angry with her. 

Somewhere the need to channel emotions made itself felt itself felt clearly, things she’d experienced herself. 
Even though I’d like to think the suggestions I made of how to improve her situation - eg. hang out more with people, groups and/or associations, meetups, etc… that could be of her interest… and of course try move away from home - were at least a bit reasonable, they were met with… sometimes a passion to denounce their validity… sometimes a catharsis of how problematic her situation was… and sometimes with suggestions it was really me that had the problems, and that I should really listen to my own advice… 

(Maybe to be clear - it’s not that I’m criticising Helen for how she’s been responding. More of an reflection of what unfortunate things context can do to people ). 

Somewhere the words of the mother came out clearest as Helen would turn my suggestions from me, as to what could be good to do, (again, as mentioned above) in the other direction, so they’d be pointing at me. Maybe this was a remnant of conversations at home, where accusations of wrongdoing would fly through the air, with the popular defence being to turn them pointing in the opposite direction… 



I feel sorry for her. I’ve seen something similar happen and expressed by a number of friends. With Helen though, both her context seems worse, as does her hope for the future. She’s now somewhere at dismissing all my suggestions, saying she’s unchangeable. 

She’s got her work at The Economist, until December. Then she’s just another (albeit information design centered) graphic designer, without coding skills, on the job market :( 


(I’m also realising there’s maybe a bit more personal catharsis, in relating these matters, than the reflection of effects of difficult circumstance, I was hoping for. Sorrys ).



At the risk of sounding a bit ego-centric, I also hadn’t realised the effects on oneself that can come out of trying to help someone in such a difficult situation. 

Somewhere I hadn’t realised how much of one’s thoughts and, well, balance, such matters could occupy. I’ve talked to a number of people about personal emotional matters that have been something of concern. However, I’ve never quite experienced something as intense and personally affecting. Maybe it’s something about the anger and hopelessness of Helen’s situation. 

The anger and hopelessness, after a while, had me quite unfocused and stressed, generally, after a while. Somewhere Helen felt the need to express some emotions quickly - or at least to reply quickly - without perhaps the deepest of reflections. It felt more like her wanting to use emails as processing her emotions abstractly, on perhaps a short term basis, rather than engage with the subject at hand. The difference between reflective/d responses and the ‘shot-from-the-hip’ unconsidered responses I’d often get from her, was both a bit harsh mentally, and made one lose a bit of faith of having a conversation that would lead to more resolution, resolve and positive development, than the cat fight things felt like quite often. 
Somewhere a frustration developed, as the conversations didn’t seem to lead anywhere ( but hurt maybe ).

Aside from a growing stress from trying to continue conversations that didn’t seem to lead very far, I was frightened by a developing sense that resorting to similar conversational tactics as Helen, was ok. That it felt quite ok to resort to unthinking responses, and to just send any suggestions of considerations of something, back to the person who originally sent it. 
I hadn’t quite realised how anger in a conversation  - of the sort I’d had with Helen - could lure out some sides of oneself that wouldn’t help anything but maybe an ego frustrated by the anger sent in its direction, to feel vindicated. 
I guess there are sides of me, that were also hurt, through trickier bits of my growing up, that could still use some channeling and conversation, to get them into a more settled state. 

Anyway, it was a bit frightening to see these responses come out, albeit agitated into the clear and present by exposure to anger. 
Somewhere I’d like to think one could talk people to reason, rather than try resolve situations by nasty tricks and anger. But who knows, maybe anger is the language one needs to use a bit to reach some people. At least in my case, I’m not sure how using a bit of anger to open someone up and off the path they keep following mentally, could be accomplished. 



Of course, while I write of Helen’s situation and doings, focusing the light on her, I do it also, since I recognise many bits of her doings from myself, and my specific pointing of the light is based on what I know… if not from myself, than some friends. 

It’s a bit difficult to know oneself entirely, especially after difficult experiences. Where is one unfortunately too emotionally intense, unreasonable, or unreflective? What comes out when one’s under pressure, and one’s reflective defences are stressed away? I’d like to think I’ve learned a lot about myself after some difficult experiences. But, well, the question remains, how to keep track of oneself. Maybe occasional difficult experiences are useful for learning about these things, as the door to one’s more unreflective self is opened and exposed. 


At the risk of intellectualising things, and fitting everything into a model I’ve recently seen, I realise that there were a lot of things that happened before I was ten, when my parents were still together, mostly arguing, that left a lot of marks. 
I’d forgotten about my mothers’ irrational anger at the time, but Helen’s experiences both made me think and remember more from that period, and also to make me think and research more about what the consequences of such experiences can be. It’s maybe been a both enlightening and slightly unsettling way of seeing oneself. 

Looking back at all that happened, I’m really appreciative for the calm of my father. ( When I was twelve, after my parents divorced, I could choose which parent(s) to spend my time with, and I chose to stay with my father. )
It was really relaxing to be with my father, even though we also had some occasional misunderstandings ( and that he was terrible at cooking :) )), in many ways I only really understand now. 

( He was also quite clever in other ways that he put my life together. I quite appreciate the strategy, now I think back and can perhaps see the larger picture, from a designers’ systematic perspective of things. He made sure I took part in many activities, helped me become interested in knowledge, made sure I lived and was surrounded by things that didn’t trigger chemical allergies ( well, mostly ), made sure I spent a lot of my childhood with a dog ( good for developing the immune system ), and made a big effort to put me in good schools. These were pretty much all things he’d missed when he grew up, but somehow learned the importance of, along the way. ).




Well, somewhere I think matters with Helen set a number of thoughts and reflections into motion, that had perhaps not seen much exercise earlier. I’m sorry if it seems like I’m having a catharsis in your direction about them. 
You needn’t feel any urge from my side to respond. As usual, I just vent my thoughts. Hope they’re not unbearable or confusing. 

Thanks again for the thoughts regarding Helen and what I can do. 
I feel guilty for not being able to do more… but I suppose it would really need to be there in person. 
( Somewhat, awkwardly, I also admit that one could easily end up in a situation where one will end up taking care of her the rest of one’s life, or at least that there’s not space for anyone else than her. While it might lead her to a more positive development of her circumstances and life, somewhere I suspect there would be many years of hard purging of Helen’s emotions, before she’d feel comfortable and calm, without occasionally doing some quite heavy and sharp outings of earlier hurts.
If things couldn’t be processed for her emotionally, I could imagine she could become like my father’s girlfriend, envious of other people, and when other people aren’t around for venting unfortunate emotions from her childhood hurts, venting them on my father. ).

In a perhaps misplaced ironic note, I wonder whether the proper thing to do is to become a clinical psychologist, so at least I can help people like Helen without needing to live with them. 


( A friend of mine mentioned some research that people in relationships can often end up with a partner that has the same problems as the parent with the more unfortunate problems. I’m starting to perhaps see this a bit…  but then again, what do I, in all Nordic modesty, really know… ). 



Soooo… again, don’t worry about replying.  I worry too much about having written what I’ve written, already ;)  Maybe it was a bit too much. 


I’ll write more about how I am otherwise, next. 


( Maybe a quick summary, regarding your note about missing Finland. 
Yeps, there are plenty of things to miss in Finland. I’ve been thinking about writing some blog post about the (now, alas, disintegrating - thanks to neoliberal forces ) Nordic model, for human (emotional) development, ideas, thinking and societal development. There are many good elements in the North, of societal institutions and structures, for producing societal/social and environmental sustainability. Alas, now, in the name of modernisation, they’re slightly being thrown away. 
Alas, while these elements are in the North, the attitudes and momentum for defending them, aren’t really. People are perhaps more absorbed by consumer society than maintaining society socially. ( This is perhaps where Finland is a good exception. People understand a bit more - at lest amongst my FB friends - about societal structurally, and see where the road is heading… and are vocal about it. People are more silent in Denmark and Sweden ). 
On the other hand, though Germany is more unequal and unfair, there’s also more of a common consciousness of how societal things work, and a bigger conviction to try make change for the better. So while it’s more of an unfair place, there are stronger force to right things here ( well, and also make things worse… neoliberalism and austerity hit Germany earlier than the Nordic countries. But like Sweden which it also hit earlier, I think people also have a longer experience and thus awareness neoliberal agendas are not a good idea. There’s even debate about inequality in mainstream media, where these matters are mostly only debated in alternative media in english and nordic media )).  
…erhm… well, I’ll write more another time, about how I am, before this little ‘ps’ becomes a long half-considered ps without too many details, that was supposed to be a short quick ps without too many details..